Design Document: tpt-teleop (Tele-Presence Teleoperation)
Version: 1.0.0 (v1 Monolithic Release - Extreme Performance Edition)
Date: August 26, 2026
Status: Approved for Development
1. Executive Summary
tpt-teleop is a hyper-optimized, zero-bloat, Rust-based middleware workspace for the teleoperation of physical robots and drones.
While v1 includes a comprehensive feature set, it fundamentally rejects the "heavy" Rust ecosystem norms. By stripping out bloated async runtimes (like Tokio), avoiding heavy serialization frameworks, and writing custom lock-free, zero-copy primitives from scratch, tpt-teleop guarantees microsecond-level determinism and absolute minimal memory overhead.
2. Licensing & Dependency Policy (Strict Enforcement)
Project License: tpt-teleop itself will be dual-licensed under MIT OR Apache-2.0, ensuring maximum adoption and standard Rust ecosystem compatibility.
Dependency Policy (The "MIT Chain"):
To ensure the MIT chain remains unbroken and to avoid any Apache-only patent liabilities in the dependency tree, cargo-deny is configured with strict rules:
Allowed: MIT, BSD (2/3-Clause), ISC, Zlib, MPL 2.0.
Dual-Licensed: Crates licensed as MIT OR Apache-2.0 are allowed, but Cargo is explicitly configured to resolve and compile them strictly under the MIT license.
Banned: Any crate that is strictly Apache-2.0.
3. The "Extreme Performance" Philosophy
To achieve the lowest possible latency and jitter, tpt-teleop abandons standard Rust web/async paradigms in favor of embedded-style, bare-metal optimization techniques applied to userspace applications.
3.1. No Tokio / Custom Async Runtime
Tokio’s work-stealing scheduler introduces latency jitter and pulls in a massive dependency tree.
The Solution: tpt-teleop uses a Thread-Per-Core architecture. We do not use a global async runtime. Instead, we use raw io_uring (Linux) / kqueue (macOS/BSD) via the io-uring (MIT) crate, or write a custom epoll event loop from scratch. Each CPU core is pinned to a specific task (e.g., Core 0: Video Encoding, Core 1: Control Loop, Core 2: Network I/O) to eliminate context-switching and cache-thrashing.
3.2. Lock-Free IPC (No Channels)
Standard std::sync::mpsc or tokio::sync::broadcast involve mutexes and allocations.
The Solution: We wrote tpt-teleop-ring (a custom internal crate). It is a lock-free, wait-free, Single-Producer-Single-Consumer (SPSC) ring buffer allocated in shared memory. Data is passed between threads via zero-copy pointer passing.
3.3. Zero-Copy Serialization (No Serde)
serde is incredibly flexible but requires allocations and copies.
The Solution: We use rkyv (MIT) for all internal and network serialization. rkyv allows us to serialize data directly into a byte buffer and deserialize it with zero allocations and zero copies by simply casting byte slices to structs.
3.4. Custom Memory Allocators
Standard malloc causes fragmentation and latency spikes when allocating large video frames.
The Solution: tpt-teleop-media uses a custom Slab Allocator and Memory Pool. Video frames and sensor packets are pre-allocated at startup and recycled. There are zero heap allocations in the hot path.
4. Workspace Architecture (The Crates)
Every crate uses the tpt-teleop- prefix.
Core Workspace Crates
tpt-teleop-core: The central state machine, autonomy handover logic, and the custom lock-free message bus.
tpt-teleop-link: Custom UDP multiplexer, io_uring based networking, and WebRTC integration.
tpt-teleop-input: Universal controller abstraction, polling directly from /dev/input or raw HID reports to bypass OS overhead. Also accepts AI-driven input sources, which produce ControlCommand streams through the same pipeline as human HID/VR sources.
tpt-teleop-media: Zero-copy camera ingestion, custom slab-allocated frame buffers, and hardware-accelerated encoding.
tpt-teleop-safety: Geofencing, latency compensation, and emergency overrides. Runs on a dedicated, highest-priority RT (Real-Time) thread.
tpt-teleop-hal: Hardware Abstraction Layer. Direct memory-mapped I/O for CAN bus and serial, bypassing heavy OS abstractions.
tpt-teleop-cloud: A minimal, custom-built HTTP/3 and WebSocket server (built on raw socket2 and quinn) for fleet management, entirely avoiding axum/hyper/tokio. Exposes an MCP supervisory interface for AI-driven fleet dispatch across multiple units.
tpt-teleop-sec: Zero-trust security, E2EE, and RBAC. Uses ring (ISC/MIT) for cryptography.
tpt-teleop-analytics: Flight Data Recorder (FDR) writing directly to disk via O_DIRECT to bypass the OS page cache.
5. The "Everything" Feature Matrix (v1)
5.1. Control & Input (tpt-teleop-input)
Raw HID Polling: Bypasses gilrs for the absolute lowest latency by reading raw HID reports directly via hidapi (MIT) or custom evdev (MIT) bindings.
VR/AR Hand Tracking: OpenXR integration for 6DOF control.
Haptic Feedback Loop: Direct force-feedback routing.
Shared / Co-Pilot Control: Lock-free state sharing for multiple operators.
AI Input Source: An AI process is a first-class ControlCommand producer, occupying the same operator role as a human HID/VR source. Selected per-unit, it drives Auto (full autonomy) or Assist (AI-assisted) mode without requiring any change to the existing Mode state machine.
5.2. Networking & Transport (tpt-teleop-link)
Custom UDP Multiplexer: We wrote a custom UDP multiplexer from scratch to multiplex control, telemetry, and WebRTC ICE traffic over a single port (UDP 443), bypassing the heavy overhead of standard WebRTC stacks for simple control packets.
QUIC Fallback: Uses quinn (MIT) for reliable control channels if UDP is blocked.
Mesh Networking: Custom neighbor-discovery protocol for drone swarms.
Bandwidth Throttling: Dynamically adjusts tpt-teleop-media encoding bitrate based on real-time io_uring network backpressure.
5.3. Media & Telemetry (tpt-teleop-media)
Zero-Copy V4L2 / DirectShow: Grabs camera frames directly into pre-allocated memory pools. No intermediate copies.
Hardware-Accelerated Encoding: Direct bindings to NVENC/AMF via custom va-api wrappers.
AR HUD: Uses wgpu (MIT) in a headless, off-screen rendering context to burn telemetry directly into the video frame before encoding.
5.4. Safety & Autonomy Handover (tpt-teleop-core & tpt-teleop-safety)
Deterministic Safety Loop: tpt-teleop-safety runs on an isolated thread with SCHED_FIFO (Linux) or equivalent real-time priority. It intercepts commands in <10 microseconds.
Predictive Collision Avoidance: Intercepts operator commands and applies kinematic limits.
Seamless Autonomy Handover: Mathematically smoothed transitions (using cubic splines) between Auto, Assist, and Full Teleop modes.
Shared Control (Override/Veto Model): When AI and a human operator are both present on a unit, the human remains sole author of intent — the AI never injects new commands. It may only clamp or restrict the human's ControlCommand at the existing safety-loop insertion point (see §6), the same way geofence/kinematic-limit enforcement already works. This keeps a human always accountable for the resulting motion. Continuous blended/weighted control (mixing human and AI intent by ratio) is a possible future extension and is explicitly out of scope for v1.
5.5. Hardware Abstraction (tpt-teleop-hal)
Raw SocketCAN: Direct interaction with CAN buses using socketcan (MIT) without heavy middleware.
MAVLink: Lightweight, custom MAVLink parser written from scratch to avoid the overhead of rust-mavlink's serialization, parsing directly into rkyv structs.
Mock Hardware: A built-in physics simulator using rapier (MIT side) for testing.
5.6. Cloud & Multi-Tenancy (tpt-teleop-cloud)
Custom HTTP/3 Server: Built from scratch using quinn (MIT) and raw socket2. No hyper, no tokio. Handles fleet dashboard API requests with minimal memory footprint.
WebRTC SFU: Uses webrtc-rs (MIT) but heavily patched to use our custom lock-free ring buffers for media routing, eliminating internal allocations.
Session Recording: Writes raw rkyv byte streams directly to disk.
AI & Fleet Dispatch: An MCP (Model Context Protocol) supervisory interface, distinct from the per-tick ControlCommand path — MCP is intent-level (list units, assign a unit a mission, engage autonomy on a unit, take manual control), never the real-time control loop itself, since request/response latency would violate the determinism goals in §3. This is also the layer where multi-unit addressing must be introduced: today's session/ControlCommand model is implicitly single-unit, so a unit identifier and per-unit session routing are required here before an AI dispatcher (or an operator) can address more than one unit.
5.7. Security & Compliance (tpt-teleop-sec)
E2EE: Uses ring (ISC/MIT) for AES-256-GCM and ChaCha20-Poly1305.
Zero-Copy Crypto: Decrypts network packets directly into the tpt-teleop-ring buffer.
5.8. Analytics & AI Export (tpt-teleop-analytics)
O_DIRECT Logging: Bypasses the OS page cache to write FDR data directly to NVMe storage, ensuring logging never blocks the control loop.
AI Training Pipeline: Exports rkyv buffers directly into PyTorch/JAX compatible memory formats.
6. The TPT Data Flow (Zero-Copy Path)
To illustrate the efficiency, here is how a single control command flows through the system:
Ingest: tpt-teleop-input reads a raw HID report from the OS.
Normalize: The raw bytes are cast (zero-copy) into a ControlCommand struct.
Route: The struct is pushed into the tpt-teleop-ring (lock-free SPSC queue).
Safety: tpt-teleop-safety pops the struct, checks geofences, modifies the struct in-place, and pushes it to the next ring.
Serialize: tpt-teleop-link uses rkyv to serialize the struct directly into a pre-allocated UDP packet buffer.
Transmit: The buffer is handed to io_uring for asynchronous, zero-copy kernel transmission.
Total allocations in this path: Zero.
Total mutex locks in this path: Zero.
7. Dependency Matrix (The "No-Bloat" Stack)
Functionality
Standard Rust Ecosystem (Banned/Avoided)
tpt-teleop Custom / Lightweight Choice
License
Async Runtime
tokio, async-std
Custom io_uring event loop / Thread-per-core
MIT
Web Framework
axum, actix-web, hyper
Custom minimal HTTP/3 server via quinn + socket2
MIT
Serialization
serde, bincode, prost
rkyv (Zero-copy)
MIT
IPC / Channels
tokio::sync, crossbeam
Custom tpt-teleop-ring (Lock-free SPSC)
MIT
Cryptography
openssl, rustls
ring
ISC / MIT
Networking
reqwest, hyper
socket2, quinn, Custom UDP Mux
MIT
Video/Media
ffmpeg (heavy CLI wrappers)
 va-api bindings
 MIT
Physics/Sim
bevy (heavy ECS)
rapier (MIT side only)
MIT

8. Developer Experience (DX)
Despite the extreme low-level optimization, the developer experience remains ergonomic via procedural macros that hide the unsafe, zero-copy boilerplate.
Macro-Driven Setup

use tpt_teleop_core::prelude::*;

// The macro generates the lock-free rings, the thread-pinning, 
// and the zero-copy serialization boilerplate.
#[tpt_teleop::robot(thread_per_core = true)]
struct MyDrone {
    #[tpt_teleop::camera(resolution = "1080p", zero_copy = true)]
    front_cam: Camera,
    
    #[tpt_teleop::motor(bus = "CAN", priority = "REALTIME")]
    left_rotor: Motor,
}

CLI Tool (tpt-teleop-cli): Scaffolds projects, configures cargo-deny for the MIT chain, and sets up CPU core pinning profiles.